Well, hi, everybody. My name is Garrick, and today I'd like to talk about a package that
I wrote called Epoxy. But first, I'd like to tell you a little bit about my kids. My
daughter Ruth is turning four soon, and my son Augie is about to turn seven. And six
going on seven is a really fun age. It's about the time when you start to ask questions
like, Dad, how much money do you make? Or recently, okay, so tell me, you sit in front
of a computer all day and you type on it, and then they give you money? And I was thinking
about this because I ran into a dataset on the Tidy Tuesday project about childcare costs.
Did you know that infant daycare in the United States costs up to $15,417 a year? Now, I
know what you're thinking. Children are expensive. And they are. You're right. And also, as a
room full of data scientists, I also have a suspicion that you're kind of thinking about
this number. How did that number get there? Like, which dataset did it come from? It came
from the Department of Labor, for example. But what decisions were made in the process
of grouping and summarizing and aggregating and calculating this statistic? And that's
a very valid question. As someone who spent a lot of time thinking about how data scientists
write reports and spending time building tooling for data scientists to write reports and build
apps, when I ask how did that number get there, I'm thinking very specifically, like,
how did that number get there? Right? I'm imagining somebody sitting down at a word
processor and they start typing. Infant daycare costs up to how much does it cost? And then
they maybe open up a spreadsheet and they find the cell where they did the calculation
and they copy it and then they come back here and they paste it. A year. Okay, cool. That's
how much it costs a year. I like to imagine a data scientist who is working in R Markdown
and they're writing this in kind of the same way. They write the sentence, infant daycare
costs up to, but when they get to this point, they have some extra context available to
them. In this R Markdown report, just a little bit above this sentence, there's a code chunk
where they've been doing this calculation. They took childcare costs and they grouped
and summarized and filtered and they came up with a number and they called that, they
put it in a variable and they called that variable max median cost. Already you know
something more than you did before about that number because we see the label that it was
given when we saved that number to a variable. And having this context, they can take that
variable and use R's inline code syntax, right, to embed the max median cost of childcare
right into the sentence with a little backtick R and then the variable and another backtick.
This is the power and the promise and just what makes R Markdown wonderful, right? That
you can work with your data and also talk about it, summarize it, report on it, describe
it to other people here in the same place, right? It's kind of like a source document
for the report, right? And at some point you hit the render button and you get this amazing
this amazing sentence. Yeah. Infant daycare costs up to 1.541696 and then that part, the
little bit at the end means like times 10 raised to the fourth power. This doesn't make
any sense. It doesn't hit in the same way as this statistic. This problem of what happens
right before of formatting things in a way that is readable and useful is exactly the
problem that Epoxy is trying to solve. It gives you an inline syntax that makes it easy
to use just-in-time formatting so you can say that that thing should be formatted as
a currency. And as a result, we also get to use some of Knitter's powerful tools like
these chunks to create little templates that we can reuse throughout our document. If this
hex sticker looks familiar to you, it's because Epoxy is built on another really cool R package
called Glue. Glue is really, really cool and we'll see the syntax for Glue and how Glue
powers Epoxy. But Glue has a different target audience. Glue is made primarily for developers.
It's very lightweight, so developers can feel comfortable bringing it into their packages.
It has no dependencies, which means that it's kind of limited. It's pretty good in files
that end in R or places where you're writing R scripts. Epoxy, on the other hand, takes
the assumption that we're providing a tool for data scientists. We will build on packages
that you're probably already using to do the formatting. And then you can use Epoxy
in a bunch of different ways to kind of make Glue more powerful for you in R scripts and
reports like R Markdown and Quarto and in Shiny apps. We're going to see a little bit
of all three of those things today. Okay, let's go back to our sentence. Infant daycare
costs. This is the R Markdown version. And we're going to turn this into an Epoxy version.
The first step is to put the whole thing into a chunk, an Epoxy chunk. This is kind of like
an R chunk, except what's inside is going to be Markdown. Once we've done that, we can
now use Epoxy syntax for inline code. Instead of the backticks R space expression backtick,
we wrap the expression in curly braces. You can even say we embrace the expression. And
then the final little bit of flair is to say how we want this thing to be formatted. So,
we add dot dollar, borrowing from some syntax that I learned from the CLI package. Dot dollar
says format this as a currency. When we render this, you get a nicely formatted sentence,
a number. Okay. Let's step back and see how this magic works just a little bit. When you're
using Glue, Glue works great for strings. It's a little bit like paste, except it uses
this embracing syntax to mark an expression. And it will go find max, median, cost in your
global environment and fill it in. It doesn't do much formatting, though. But it does give
us a key that Epoxy builds on. And that's the transformer argument. So, normally the
identity transformer is the normal thing that Glue does. And it basically says find this
variable and replace it with its value. Epoxy steps in here and uses the transformer argument
to provide its own logic for what should happen when we see these embraced expressions. And
that lets us do things like use the dot dollar syntax. And now we have a number formatted
like a dollar. And, of course, this is a lot of stuff that you don't want to type every
time you use Epoxy. So, Epoxy wraps it all up into one function called Epoxy. And this
also then powers the chunk, the Epoxy chunk. All right. Let's see some of these other things
that you can do with these inline formatting syntaxes. So, we saw that if you have a number
that should be a currency or a dollar unit, you can use dot dollar. And we get a number
formatted like a dollar. If you have a number between zero and one that should look like
a percentage, you can say dot percent. And it's formatted like a percentage. A very large
number that should probably have some commas to tell you where the placeholders are, you
can use dot comma. Epoxy isn't just for numbers. You can also use it for text. Suppose you
have oh, wait, no, there's one more number thing. And that is an ordinal. So, this is
something like saying first, second, third, fourth, et cetera. And then it's not just
for numbers. It's also for text. It's pretty cool. That you can do things like take a character
string and say I want this to be formatted in title case. You could take a string and
say I would like it to be bold. You could take another string and say I'd like this
to be italic. Okay. Let's put this all together into like a statistic, a real sentence that
kind of actually that uses all these things and makes sense. We'll throw it in a blender
and we get this. First, we start with a chunk. We call that it's the epoxy chunk. We give
it a label. This time we're gonna give it a label of cost summary. So, remember that.
We're gonna come back to that in a second. And in here, I'll just use the embrace syntax
with these little dot transformers. And I can write infant daycare in very large counties
ranks first in child care costs at 15,416.96 cents per year or 24% of median household
income. Okay. That's pretty cool. It's nice. I like it. I like parts of it. But there's
a couple little things that are bugging me still. And we're gonna fix those. The first
one is that 15,400 something dollars is kind of it's a big number. And I would like to,
you know, express this in terms of how much is that per month? What is the monthly budget
of child care costs? So, to do that, you would take, you know, 15,000 and whatever
and divide it by 12. You might write a little function to do that. Take X, divide it by
12. And if you give it to another function called epoxy transform set with a little name
like .CPM, you've now created your own inline transformer that you can use. So, if I go
back to my sentence, I can add a phrase like about .CPM median max cost per month, which
turns into 12,800 something. It's not right. But we'll get there. Hold on. So, you can
actually format that like a dollar also by adding another level of embracing. And now
we have 1,284. The previous slide should have said 1,284 as well. But just without
the decoration of dollars. But, yeah. So, you can compose these. So, you can have multiple
transformations as you move from the number to the thing that you actually want to show.
And you know, we could do even more. And we could add bold or italic around that as well.
These .$ and .% and the other ones that we saw that are built in with Epoxy are basically
just functions as well. They come from packages that we use already and that we know, like
the scales package. So, .$ really is just labeled dollar from the scales package and
.% is labeled percent from the scales package. So, now we get to the other little thing that's
bugging me about this. It's like, do we really need to include the number of cents in our
summary of per year, right? But maybe I do want a little bit more accuracy in terms of
the percentage because I'm comparing between counties. And you know, the median household
income. You know, I want it to sound really official. So, like we need another decimal
point before that percentage. So, label dollar and label percent have arguments. And you can
say I want dollars rounded to the nearest hundred. And label percent, you can say I
want that rounded to the nearest. I want to show at least .1. So, now we have 23.8%
in median household income. And we have about $1,300 per month. That's a lot of money. That
number hits differently than our original statistic did, right? So, so far I've been
kind of pretending like these variables come from the global environment. And they could.
You could be calculating each one of these and you could save them in a variable or something.
But most likely you're going to put this in a data frame. You have a data frame. You've
been using that to summarize. And you can see now this whole time I've actually been
sneakily using a data frame. And you can see the columns that we've seen so far. Like max,
median, cost right there in the middle. And age. So, if I would like to have this
epoxy chunk use a data frame, say a row from the data frame, perhaps the first row from
the data frame, I can use the .data chunk option and give it a data frame or a row from
a data frame. Here's the first one. This is the same stat that we saw so far. And if I
wanted to, for example, compare infant daycare with infant home care, then I could go back
and look at this table and say, oh, it's row number 8. And I can change the data argument
to row number 8. And now epoxy is going to take that row and apply the values in that
row of the data frame to the template. And now the chunk itself kind of looks more like
a template that we can reuse. Most people, however, don't really like, you know, having
to use chunk options as a way to interface with this. And certainly you're not going
to just be like, oh, I want the eighth row. That's not how we think about this. Instead,
what you would do is you take your child care summary, you pipe it into dplyr filter. You
say age, I want where age is infant, where type is home care, where county size is very
large. And imagine this is in an R chunk in your document. And we have that other epoxy
chunk that we talked about earlier that has the label cost summary. So, I can pipe this
data frame, which has one row, into epoxy use chunk, tell it to use the chunk with the
label cost summary, and now re-render that sentence using these new values. There we
go. Sometimes you don't write and just mark down. So, the epoxy chunks we've been seeing
so far assume that what is in that chunk is basically marked down. But sometimes you need
to actually write HTML or you're writing an HTML report and you want the stuff coming
out of these epoxy chunks to be HTML. Sometimes you might be writing in LaTeX and you need
to write some LaTeX if you have to. And in both cases, epoxy gives you two chunk types.
We have an epoxy HTML chunk engine and an epoxy LaTeX chunk engine. They have slightly
different semantics, just a little bit. It's just tweaked enough to make it really make
sense for that language. So, in HTML, it's double embracing. And instead of dot bold,
we would use at bold. What you get, though, is you get actual HTML instead of markdown
formatting for bold, for example. In LaTeX, it's basically the same except the embrace
characters are kind of taken already in LaTeX. So, we use chompy alligator things and we put
that around county size. And we can still use dot bold. And in the end, you get whatever
that is that LaTeX uses to make bold text. Okay. All of these chunks are powered by our
functions ultimately. So, under the hood, you can just easily call this an R. So,
we have an epoxy function, epoxy HTML, epoxy LaTeX. Epoxy itself is basically kind of like
a drop in replacement for glue with all these extra fun little bits. But because we don't have
chunks in the R console or in R script, you can also use epoxy use file and read a template from
a file. So, we've seen how you can use epoxy in reports, our markdown quarter reports,
markdown HTML LaTeX outputs. We've seen epoxy in scripts kind of. I mean, you get the idea,
right? We can use it with these three functions. And I really can't talk at PositConf without
mentioning my favorite web framework of all time. Shiny. So, let me show you a Shiny app.
In this case, epoxy brings these same ideas to a Shiny app with a little bit of a twist. So,
it's not quite the same as what we've seen, but it's kind of the same idea. So, here's a Shiny
app. Don't try to read all the code, please. It makes a little app like this. We have three inputs
where we get greeting company and year. And then we have a section that we mark with UI epoxy HTML.
We give it an ID so we can find it. And inside of that, we can just put Shiny things, UI elements,
labels, pretty much anything. Here I picked P. And you can see kind of the template. So,
it's making a paragraph tag and there's some stuff written in there. And you can see kind
of the template for it. We have greetings, company, and year, right? So, on the server side,
we match we take render epoxy, match that to the ID of the template, which was hello.
And then we send it some things that are going to end up being text.
And they come out at the bottom. They come out in the paragraph tag over here. Hello, RStudio.
Oh, hello, PositConf.
So, that's a pretty quick summary of what epoxy does. There's a whole lot more that it can do.
And just to remind you what we talked about, epoxy is a great way to blend data and prose,
build on the ideas of R Markdown. It gives you reusable templates, just-in-time formatting,
use it in your reports and your scripts and your apps. Generally, just go have fun with it. And
you can find it here and online in general. And thank you very much.